docs: add blog post Next-level IaC: Pulumi Automation API and API Economy (#4236)
pulumi/pulumi-hugo: themes/default/content/blog/next-level-iac-pulumi-automation-api/index.md

---
title: "Next-level IaC: How Pulumi Supports Your API Economy Strategy"
allow_long_title: true
date: 2024-05-06
meta_desc: Learn how to use Pulumi Automation API to build your own Service API and expose it to your organization.
meta_image: meta.png

authors:

- engin-diri

tags:

- next-level-iac
- automation-api
- api-economy
- cloudformation
- terraform
- hcl

---

> When I am talking with community members, who are not using Pulumi yet, I often get asked what would be a good way to include their Infrastructure as Code (IaC) into existing software like a REST API. And my answer is always the same: Use our Pulumi Automation API.

Reviewer: Somewhere in here we need to link to the actual Automation API docs.

Author: done

    name: string;
    org: string;
    project: string;
    stack: string;
    region: string;
}

async function setUpPulumiProgram(payload: ServicePayload) {
    const org = payload.org;
    const project = payload.project;
    const stackName = fullyQualifiedStackName(org, project, payload.stack);
    const awsRegion = payload.region;

    return await RemoteWorkspace.createOrSelectStack({
        stackName,
        url: "https://github.com/pulumi/examples.git",
        branch: "refs/heads/master",
        projectPath: project,
    }, {
        envVars: {
            AWS_REGION: awsRegion,
            AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: process.env.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID ?? "",
            AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: {secret: process.env.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY ?? ""},
            AWS_SESSION_TOKEN: {secret: process.env.AWS_SESSION_TOKEN ?? ""},
        },
    });
}

app.post('/', async (req, res) => {
    const payload: ServicePayload = req.body;

    if ((payload.name) || !payload.org || !payload.project || !payload.stack || !payload.region) {
        res.status(400).send('Name, org, project, stack and region are required');
        return;
    }

    const stack = await setUpPulumiProgram(payload);

>     const upRes = await stack.up({onOutput: console.log});

Reviewer: This is where the real magic happens -- but it's _super_ easy to miss that what you're doing here is running Pulumi among this sea of code. We should at least drop some comments to draw attention to the most relevant portions of the code (the import statement, the calls to run `up`, etc.). It'd also be awesome to see what it actually looks like (in terms of output) when it runs, just so the user who's skimming can see what it is the content of the post is actually doing.

Author: done!

                "AWS_SESSION_TOKEN":     auto.Secret(os.environ["AWS_SESSION_TOKEN"]),
            },
        ),
    )

@app.post("/")
async def create(payload: ServicePayload):
    stack = setup_pulumi_program(payload)
    up_res = stack.up(on_output=print)
    return {"url": up_res.outputs['websiteUrl'].value}

@app.delete("/")
async def delete(name: str, org: str, project: str, stack: str, region: str):
    payload = ServicePayload(name=name, org=org, project=project, stack=stack, region=region)
    stack = setup_pulumi_program(payload)
    stack.destroy(on_output=print)
    return {"message": "Stack destroyed"}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

To test the REST services, you can use a tool like `curl` or Postman. Here is an example of how you can create a new stack using `curl`:

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"name": "myexample", "org": "myorg", "project": "myproject", "stack": "mystack", "region": "us-west-2"}' http://localhost:3000
```

And here is an example of how you can delete a stack using `curl`:

```bash
curl -X DELETE "http://localhost:8000/?name=myexample&org=myorg&project=myproject&stack=mystack&region=us-west-2"
```

## Next Steps

> Now that we have our basic REST services, we can deploy them on a server (using a service like AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, or Azure Functions) and expose them to the rest of the organization via an API Gateway. Parallel you can publish release notes and documentation to your organization, so that they can start using your new Service API.

Author: done

          description: AWS region where the service will be deployed
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Infrastructure successfully destroyed
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                properties:
                  message:
                    type: string
                    description: Confirmation message of the destruction
        '400':
          description: Bad request if the required parameters are missing
        '500':
          description: Internal server error
components:
  schemas:
    ServicePayload:
      type: object
      required:
        - name
        - org
        - project
        - stack
        - region
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
          description: Name of the service
        org:
          type: string
          description: Organization in Pulumi
        project:
          type: string
          description: Project name in Pulumi
        stack:
          type: string
          description: Stack name in Pulumi
        region:
          type: string
          description: AWS region where the service will be deployed
```

> Navigate to the [Swagger Editor](https://editor.swagger.io/) and paste the above OpenAPI specification to see how it looks like.

Author: done

![Swagger Editor](swagger.png)

## Conclusion

> In this blog post, we have seen how you can use Pulumi Automation API to build your own Service API and expose it to your organization.

Author: done

> We have also seen how you can use API Economy to create new business models and revenue streams by exposing your infrastructure to the rest of the organization.

Author: That is the thing. Folks do not know about this part. Automation API has several benefits. Yes there is the obvious practitioner-focused but also now the chance to expose infrastructure provisioning internal or external as API is a real game changer.

---

> title: "Next-level IaC: Pulumi Automation API and API Economy"

Reviewer 2: I think we should drop Automation API from the title. I want people to just focus on the use case or unique mechanism.

date: 2024-04-26
meta_desc: Learn how to use Pulumi Automation API to build your own Service API and expose it to your organization.
meta_image: meta.png

authors:

- engin-diri

tags:

- next-level-iac
- automation-api
- api-economy
- cloudformation
- terraform
- hcl

---

> When I am talking with our customers and users, there is one common theme that comes up: how can we make infrastructure as code (IaC) more accessible to our organization? This is a great question, and it is something that we have been thinking about a lot at Pulumi.

Reviewer 2: I think we should focus a bit more on how this functionality of Pulumi is unique. There is abc need out there, other IaCs and solutions struggle to solve and need xyz workarounds. With Pulumi, we have this custom built in so you can do abc easily.

## What is API Economy?

![API Economy](api-economy.png)

(Image [source](http://localhost:1313/blog/next-level-iac-pulumi-automation-api/api-economy.png))

As a matter of fact: — APIs enable innovation.

> Over [40% of large organizations](https://www.forbes.com/sites/patricksalyer/2021/05/04/api-stack-the-billion-dollar-opportunities-redefining-infrastructure-services--platforms/?sh=2d6c47f043f9) have 250+ APIs. And 71% plan to use even more APIs this year.

API Economy is a term that is used to describe the way that organizations are using APIs to create new business models and revenue streams. APIs are the building blocks of modern software development, and they allow developers to build on  top of existing services and create new services that are greater than the sum of their parts.

Some examples of API Economy are:

- [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/api) - Allows companies to accept payments online
- [Google Maps API](https://developers.google.com/maps) - Allows companies to use their maps, witout having to build their own
- [Uber Eats API](https://developer.uber.com/docs/eats) - Allows companies to integrate with Uber Eats and offer food delivery

> But why is API Economy important for IaC? Because it allows you to treat your infrastructure as a service. The owner of a particular piece of infrastructure (like DNS, a database, or a Kubernetes cluster) can expose that infrastructure to the rest of the organization through an API. This API can be used to provision, update, and delete the infrastructure, as well as to query its current state. This allows developers to interact with the infrastructure in a programmatic way,  just like they would interact with any other service in the organization.

Reviewer 2: I read this twice and still dont understand why I want to API wrap the infra. Maybe we need to give a few hypothetical examples to make the point

            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                properties:
                  message:
                    type: string
                    description: Confirmation message of the destruction
        '400':
          description: Bad request if the required parameters are missing
        '500':
          description: Internal server error
components:
  schemas:
    ServicePayload:
      type: object
      required:
        - name
        - org
        - project
        - stack
        - region
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
          description: Name of the service
        org:
          type: string
          description: Organization in Pulumi
        project:
          type: string
          description: Project name in Pulumi
        stack:
          type: string
          description: Stack name in Pulumi
        region:
          type: string
          description: AWS region where the service will be deployed
```

Navigate to the [Swagger Editor](https://editor.swagger.io/) and paste the above OpenAPI specification to see how it looks like.

![Swagger Editor](swagger.png)

## Conclusion

> 

Reviewer 2: The term infrastructure as a service might be overloaded since clouds like aws are known as IaaS.

---
title: "Next-level IaC: How Pulumi Supports Your API Economy Strategy"
allow_long_title: true

> date: 2024-05-06

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-05-15
```

meta_desc: Learn how to use Pulumi Automation API to build your own Service API and expose it to your organization.
meta_image: meta.png

authors:

- engin-diri

tags:

- next-level-iac
- automation-api
- api-economy
- cloudformation
- terraform
- hcl

---

When I am talking with community members, who are not using Pulumi yet, I often get asked what would be a good way to include their Infrastructure as Code (IaC) into existing software like a REST API. And my answer is always the same: Use our [Pulumi Automation API](docs/using-pulumi/automation-api/).

With the Pulumi Automation API you can include Pulumi IaC into your existing software, and this for any of the Pulumi supported programming languages like TypeScript, Python, Go, or C#. This gives you a greater flexibility and control, which you will not have with other IaC tools like CloudFormation or Terraform.

> This opens now many doors of opportunity to expose your services as an API, it could be internally to your organization or externally to your potential customers. This opportunity for innovation fuels what is known as the [API Economy](https://konghq.com/blog/enterprise/api-economy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This opens up many doors of opportunity to expose your services as an API, whether internally to your organization or externally to your potential customers. This opportunity for innovation fuels what is known as the [API Economy](https://konghq.com/blog/enterprise/api-economy).
```

## What is Pulumi Automation API in a nutshell?

Pulumi Automation API is a set of SDKs that allow you to interact with your Pulumi stacks programmatically. This means that you can use the Automation API to create, update, and delete stacks, as well as to query their current state. The Automation API is built on top of the Pulumi engine, which means that it is fully compatible with all of the existing Pulumi providers and resources.

And it is this capability that allows you to build your own Service API on top of Pulumi. We can now build a REST or gRPC API endpoint that, depending on the request parameters, will create, update, or delete a Pulumi stack. This API can then be exposed to the rest of the organization, allowing developers to interact with their infrastructure in a programmatic way.

## How to build your own Service API with Pulumi Automation API?

Let's take a look at how you can build your own Service API with Pulumi Automation API.

> For this purpose, we will build two basic REST services writen in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) and in [Python](https://www.python.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this purpose, we will build two basic REST services written in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) and in [Python](https://www.python.org/).
```
